clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/modernize/use-starts-ends-with.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - modernize-use-starts-ends-with

modernize-use-starts-ends-with
==============================

Checks for common roundabout ways to express ``starts_with`` and ``ends_with``
and suggests replacing with the simpler method when it is available. Notably, 
this will work with ``std::string`` and ``std::string_view``.

Covered scenarios:

==================================================== =====================
Expression                                           Replacement
---------------------------------------------------- ---------------------
``u.find(v) == 0``                                   ``u.starts_with(v)``
``u.rfind(v, 0) != 0``                               ``!u.starts_with(v)``
``u.compare(0, v.size(), v) == 0``                   ``u.starts_with(v)``
``u.substr(0, v.size()) == v``                       ``u.starts_with(v)``
``v != u.substr(0, v.size())``                       ``!u.starts_with(v)``
``u.compare(u.size() - v.size(), v.size(), v) == 0`` ``u.ends_with(v)``
``u.rfind(v) == u.size() - v.size()``                ``u.ends_with(v)``
==================================================== =====================

Commit message:

[clang-tidy] modernize-use-starts-ends-with: fix false positives on `find` and `rfind` (#129564)
Also document cases with two or three arguments (matching default arguments)
this check matches.

Closes https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/issues/129498.

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/modernize/use-starts-ends-with.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - modernize-use-starts-ends-with

modernize-use-starts-ends-with
==============================

Checks for common roundabout ways to express ``starts_with`` and ``ends_with``
and suggests replacing with the simpler method when it is available. Notably, 
this will work with ``std::string`` and ``std::string_view``.

Covered scenarios:

==================================================== =====================
Expression                                           Replacement
---------------------------------------------------- ---------------------
``u.find(v) == 0``                                   ``u.starts_with(v)``
``u.find(v, 0) == 0``                                ``u.starts_with(v)``
``u.find(v, 0, v.size()) == 0``                      ``u.starts_with(v)``
``u.rfind(v, 0) != 0``                               ``!u.starts_with(v)``
``u.rfind(v, 0, v.size()) != 0``                     ``!u.starts_with(v)``
``u.compare(0, v.size(), v) == 0``                   ``u.starts_with(v)``
``u.substr(0, v.size()) == v``                       ``u.starts_with(v)``
``v != u.substr(0, v.size())``                       ``!u.starts_with(v)``
``u.compare(u.size() - v.size(), v.size(), v) == 0`` ``u.ends_with(v)``
``u.rfind(v) == u.size() - v.size()``                ``u.ends_with(v)``
==================================================== =====================
