flang/docs/ModFiles.md, before:

<!--===- docs/ModFiles.md 
  
   Part of the LLVM Project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
   See https://llvm.org/LICENSE.txt for license information.
   SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
  
-->

# Module Files

```{contents}
---
local:
---
```

Module files hold information from a module (or submodule) that is
necessary to compile program units in other source files that depend on that module.
Program units in the same source file as the module do not read
module files, as this compiler parses entire source files and processes
the program units it contains in dependency order.

## Name

Module files are named according to the module's name, suffixed with `.mod`.
This is consistent with other compilers and expected by makefiles and
other build systems.

Module files for submodules are named with their ancestor module's name
as a prefix, separated by a hyphen.
E.g., `module-submod.mod` is generated for submodule `submod' of module
`module`.
Some other compilers use a distinct filename suffix for submodules,
but this one doesn't.

The disadvantage of using the same name as other compilers is that it is not
clear which compiler created a `.mod` file and files from multiple compilers
cannot be in the same directory. This can be solved by adding something
between the module name and extension, e.g. `<modulename>-f18.mod`.  When
this is needed, Flang accepts the option `-module-suffix` to alter the suffix.

## Format

Module files are Fortran free form source code.
(One can, in principle, copy `foo.mod` into `tmp.f90`, recompile it,
and obtain a matching `foo.mod` file.)
They include the declarations of all visible locally defined entities along
with the private entities on which they depend.

### Header

Module files begin with a UTF-8 byte order mark and a few lines of
Fortran comments.
(Pro tip: use `dd if=foo.mod bs=1 skip=3 2>/dev/null` to skip the byte order
mark and dump the rest of the module.)
The first comment begins `!mod$` and contains a version number
and hash code.
Further `!need$` comments contain the names and hash codes of other modules
on which this module depends, and whether those modules are intrinsic
or not to Fortran.

The header comments do not contain timestamps or original source file paths.

### Body

The body comprises minimal Fortran source for the required declarations.
Their order generally matches the order they appeared in the original
source code for the module.
All types are explicit, and all non-character literal constants are
marked with explicit kind values.

Declarations of objects, interfaces, types, and other entities are
regenerated from the compiler's symbol table.
So entity declarations that spanned multiple statements in the source
program are effectively collapsed into a single *type-declaration-statement*.
Constant expressions that appear in initializers, bounds, and other sites
appear in the module file as their folded values.
Any compiler directives (`!omp$`, `!acc$`, &c.) relevant to the declarations
of names are also included in the module file.

Executable statements are omitted.
If we ever want to do Fortran-level inline expansion of procedures
in the future,
we will have to "unparse" the executable parts of their definitions.

#### Symbols included

All public symbols from the module are included.

In addition, some private symbols are needed:
- private types that appear in the public API
- private components of non-private derived types
- private parameters used in non-private declarations (initial values, kind parameters)

#### USE association

Entities that have been included in a module by means of USE association
are represented in the module file with `USE` statements.
Name aliases are sometimes necessary when an entity from another
module is needed for a declaration and conflicts with another
entity of the same name.

## Reading and writing module files

### Options

The compiler has command-line options to specify where to search
for module files and where to write them. By default it will be the current
directory for both.

`-I` specifies directories to search for include files and module
files.
`-J`, and its alias `-module-dir`, specify a directory into which module files are written
as well as to search for them.

`-fintrinsic-modules-path` is available to specify an alternative location
for Fortran's intrinsic modules.

### Writing module files

When writing a module file, if the existing one matches what would be written,
the timestamp is not updated.

Module files are written only after semantic analysis completes without
a fatal error message.

### Reading module files

When the compiler finds a `.mod` file it needs to read, it firsts checks the first
line and verifies it is a valid module file.
The header checksum must match the file's contents.
(Pro tip: if a developer needs to hack the contents of a module file, they can
recompile it afterwards as Fortran source to regenerate it with its new hash.)

The known hashes of dependent modules are used to disambiguate modules whose
names match module files in multiple search directories, as well as to
detect dependent modules whose recompilation has rendered a module file
obsolete.

The hash codes used in module files also serve as a means of protection from
updates to code in other packages.
If a project A uses module files from package B, and package B is updated in
a way that causes its module files to be updated, then the modules in A that
depend on those modules in B will no longer be accepted for use until they
have also been regenerated.
This feature can catch errors that other compilers cannot.

When processing `.mod` files we know they are valid Fortran with these properties:
1. The input (without the header) is already in the "cooked input" format.
2. No preprocessing is necessary.
3. No errors can occur.

## Error messages referring to modules

With this design, diagnostics can refer to names in modules and can emit a
normalized declaration of an entity.

## Hermetic modules files

Top-level module files for libraries can be build with `-fhermetic-module-files`.
This option causes these module files to contain copies of all of the non-intrinsic
modules on which they depend, so that non-top-level local modules and the
modules of dependent libraries need not also be packaged with the library.
When the compiler reads a hermetic module file, the copies of the dependent
modules are read into their own scope, and will not conflict with other modules
of the same name that client code might `USE`.

Commit message:

[flang] Compile the output of -fdebug-unparse-with-modules (#135696)
The output of a compilation with the -fdebug-unparse-with-modules option
comprises its normal unparsed output along with the regenerated contents
of any modules that were required from module files. This is handy for
producing stand-alone test cases.

The modules' contents are generated by the same code that writes module
files, so they can contain some USE associations to private entities in
other modules that are necessary to complete local declarations, usually
initializers. Such USE associations to private entities are not flagged
as fatal errors when modules are read from module files, but they
currently are caught when the output produced by this option is being
read back in to the compiler.

Handle this case by softening the error to a warning when one module
uses a private entity from another with an alias containing the
non-conforming '$' character. (I could have omitted the message
altogether, but there are other valid warnings that will occur due to
undefined function result variables; further, I didn't want to provide a
general hole around the protection of private names.)

flang/docs/ModFiles.md, after:

<!--===- docs/ModFiles.md 
  
   Part of the LLVM Project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM Exceptions.
   See https://llvm.org/LICENSE.txt for license information.
   SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
  
-->

# Module Files

```{contents}
---
local:
---
```

Module files hold information from a module (or submodule) that is
necessary to compile program units in other source files that depend on that module.
Program units in the same source file as the module do not read
module files, as this compiler parses entire source files and processes
the program units it contains in dependency order.

## Name

Module files are named according to the module's name, suffixed with `.mod`.
This is consistent with other compilers and expected by makefiles and
other build systems.

Module files for submodules are named with their ancestor module's name
as a prefix, separated by a hyphen.
E.g., `module-submod.mod` is generated for submodule `submod' of module
`module`.
Some other compilers use a distinct filename suffix for submodules,
but this one doesn't.

The disadvantage of using the same name as other compilers is that it is not
clear which compiler created a `.mod` file and files from multiple compilers
cannot be in the same directory. This can be solved by adding something
between the module name and extension, e.g. `<modulename>-f18.mod`.  When
this is needed, Flang accepts the option `-module-suffix` to alter the suffix.

## Format

Module files are Fortran free form source code.
(One can, in principle, copy `foo.mod` into `tmp.f90`, recompile it,
and obtain a matching `foo.mod` file.)
They include the declarations of all visible locally defined entities along
with the private entities on which they depend.

### Header

Module files begin with a UTF-8 byte order mark and a few lines of
Fortran comments.
(Pro tip: use `dd if=foo.mod bs=1 skip=3 2>/dev/null` to skip the byte order
mark and dump the rest of the module.)
The first comment begins `!mod$` and contains a version number
and hash code.
Further `!need$` comments contain the names and hash codes of other modules
on which this module depends, and whether those modules are intrinsic
or not to Fortran.

The header comments do not contain timestamps or original source file paths.

### Body

The body comprises minimal Fortran source for the required declarations.
Their order generally matches the order they appeared in the original
source code for the module.
All types are explicit, and all non-character literal constants are
marked with explicit kind values.

Declarations of objects, interfaces, types, and other entities are
regenerated from the compiler's symbol table.
So entity declarations that spanned multiple statements in the source
program are effectively collapsed into a single *type-declaration-statement*.
Constant expressions that appear in initializers, bounds, and other sites
appear in the module file as their folded values.
Any compiler directives (`!omp$`, `!acc$`, &c.) relevant to the declarations
of names are also included in the module file.

Executable statements are omitted.
If we ever want to do Fortran-level inline expansion of procedures
in the future,
we will have to "unparse" the executable parts of their definitions.

#### Symbols included

All public symbols from the module are included.

In addition, some private symbols are needed:
- private types that appear in the public API
- private components of non-private derived types
- private parameters used in non-private declarations (initial values, kind parameters)

#### USE association

Entities that have been included in a module by means of USE association
are represented in the module file with `USE` statements.
Name aliases are sometimes necessary when an entity from another
module is needed for a declaration and conflicts with another
entity of the same name, or is `PRIVATE`.
These aliases have currency symbols (`$`) in them.
When a module
is parsed from a module file, no error is emitted for associating
such an alias with a `PRIVATE` name.
A module parsed from another source file that is not a module file
(notably, the output of the `-fdebug-unparse-with-modules` option)
will emit only warnings.

## Reading and writing module files

### Options

The compiler has command-line options to specify where to search
for module files and where to write them. By default it will be the current
directory for both.

`-I` specifies directories to search for include files and module
files.
`-J`, and its alias `-module-dir`, specify a directory into which module files are written
as well as to search for them.

`-fintrinsic-modules-path` is available to specify an alternative location
for Fortran's intrinsic modules.

### Writing module files

When writing a module file, if the existing one matches what would be written,
the timestamp is not updated.

Module files are written only after semantic analysis completes without
a fatal error message.

### Reading module files

When the compiler finds a `.mod` file it needs to read, it firsts checks the first
line and verifies it is a valid module file.
The header checksum must match the file's contents.
(Pro tip: if a developer needs to hack the contents of a module file, they can
recompile it afterwards as Fortran source to regenerate it with its new hash.)

The known hashes of dependent modules are used to disambiguate modules whose
names match module files in multiple search directories, as well as to
detect dependent modules whose recompilation has rendered a module file
obsolete.

The hash codes used in module files also serve as a means of protection from
updates to code in other packages.
If a project A uses module files from package B, and package B is updated in
a way that causes its module files to be updated, then the modules in A that
depend on those modules in B will no longer be accepted for use until they
have also been regenerated.
This feature can catch errors that other compilers cannot.

When processing `.mod` files we know they are valid Fortran with these properties:
1. The input (without the header) is already in the "cooked input" format.
2. No preprocessing is necessary.
3. No errors can occur.

## Error messages referring to modules

With this design, diagnostics can refer to names in modules and can emit a
normalized declaration of an entity.

## Hermetic modules files

Top-level module files for libraries can be build with `-fhermetic-module-files`.
This option causes these module files to contain copies of all of the non-intrinsic
modules on which they depend, so that non-top-level local modules and the
modules of dependent libraries need not also be packaged with the library.
When the compiler reads a hermetic module file, the copies of the dependent
modules are read into their own scope, and will not conflict with other modules
of the same name that client code might `USE`.
